SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Resource Allocation for Integrated
Sensing and Communication (ISAC)
in Cell-Free Massive MIMO Systems
by
Xinpeng Yu
Student ID: z5615351
Thesis submitted as a requirement for the degree
Master of Engineering (Telecommunications)
Submitted: March 17, 2026
Supervisor: Derrick Wing Kwan Ng
Shaokang Hu\n\f\nContents
Contents 2
1 Thesis A Review 3
1.1 Communication Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.2 Sensing Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.3 Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2 Thesis B Progress 6
2.1 Algorithmic Analysis and Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2 Current Implementation and Identified Bottlenecks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2.1 Implementation of AO Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2.2 Performance Bottlenecks Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3 Conclusion and Future Work 11
3.1 Progress Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.2 Revised Project Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3 Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2\n\f\nChapter 1
Thesis A Review
1.1 Communication Model
In the considered multi-antenna downlink cell-free network, the system comprises multiple Ac-
cess Points (APs) equipped with Nt transmit antennas, concurrently serving K single-antenna
communication users (CUs). The system allocates independent communication beamforming
vectors wm,k to each user via linear precoding. To address the practical challenge of acquiring
perfect Channel State Information (CSI), a worst-case channel uncertainty model bounded by a
spherical norm is introduced. Specifically, the actual channel hm,k is modeled as the superposi-
tion of the estimated channel and an error vectorem,k, satisfying ∥em,k∥ ≤ ϵk. Consequently, the
communication quality is strictly defined by the worst-case Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise
Ratio (SINR). The fundamental premise of the system’s resource allocation is to guarantee that
the worst-case SINR for each user strictly satisfies the predefined Quality of Service (QoS)
threshold γk under any allowable channel error.
1.2 Sensing Model
To equip the communication network with active environmental sensing capabilities, a ded-
icated sensing signal with a covariance matrix Zm is introduced at the transmitter, which is
spatially superimposed with the communication beams. The sensing performance is evaluated
across two physical dimensions: target detection and target tracking. For detection, the sys-
tem must ensure that the effective echo SINR at the sensing receivers meets the threshold γPoD
S
required for a specified Probability of Detection (PoD). For tracking, the trace of the Fisher
3\n\f\nInformation Matrix (FIM) carried by the transmitted signals must exceed the predefined track-
ing accuracy lower bound ΓTrack. Furthermore, to facilitate distributed multi-node cooperative
sensing, binary variables bmp are formulated to dynamically define the clustering strategy of
APs assigned to specific target sensing tasks.
1.3 Problem Formulation
The following paper sets out the establishment of an ISAC joint optimization framework, build-
ing upon the aforementioned physical models. The primary objective of the framework is to
efficiently manage and allocate limited network resources to maximize the system’s energy
efficiency. This is achieved by minimizing the total transmit power at the APs while strictly
adhering to all system-level performance constraints.
This is a multi-dimensional resource allocation problem. The decision variables encompass
the continuous resources (i.e., the transmit power optimally distributed between communica-
tion precoders {wm,k[n]} and dedicated sensing covariance matrices {Zm[n]}) and the discrete
resources (i.e., the cooperative AP-target association indicators {bmp[n]}). Based on these con-
siderations, the joint resource allocation problem at time instant n is rigorously formulated as
follows:
min
{wm,k[n]},{Zm[n]},
{bmp[n]}
M∑
m=1
( K∑
k=1
∥wm,k[n]∥2 + Tr(Zm[n])
)
(1.1a)
s.t. SINR wc
k [n] ≥ γk, ∀k ∈ K, (1.1b)
SINRS,p[n] ≥ γPoD
S , ∀p ∈ P , (1.1c)
Tr
(
J data
p [n]
)
≥ ΓTrack,p, ∀p ∈ P , (1.1d)
M∑
m=1
bmp[n] = Nreq, ∀p ∈ P active
n , (1.1e)
K∑
k=1
∥wm,k[n]∥2 + Tr(Zm[n]) ≤ Pmax, ∀m ∈ M, (1.1f )
Zm[n] ⪰ 0, ∀m ∈ M, (1.1g)
bmp[n] ∈ {0, 1}, ∀m ∈ M, p ∈ P . (1.1h)
From a mathematical optimization perspective, the feasible region is severely restricted not
4\n\f\nonly by the continuous-domain worst-case QoS constraints ( 1.1b), sensing dual-threshold con-
straints (1.1c)-(1.1d), and per-AP power caps ( 1.1f), but also by the topological positive semi-
definite constraint ( 1.1g) of the covariance matrices and the discrete binary constraint ( 1.1h)
of AP selection. As a result, problem ( 1.1) is formulated as a Mixed-Integer Non-Convex
Programming (MINLP) problem. It is evident that the inherent cross-functional interference
between communication and sensing signals embedded in the constraints gives rise to highly
complex non-convex geometric characteristics. Consequently, this problem is intractable to
solve directly.
5\n\f\nChapter 2
Thesis B Progress
2.1 Algorithmic Analysis and Selection
As formulated in ( 1.1), the joint resource allocation problem for the ISAC system is math-
ematically classified as a Mixed-Integer Non-Convex Programming (MINLP) problem. The
intractability of this formulation stems from two fundamental characteristics. First, the pres-
ence of the binary AP-target association variables {bmp[n]} inherently shatters the convexity
of the feasible region. Second, even upon relaxing or fixing the discrete variables, the con-
tinuous variables—namely, the communication precoding vectors {wm,k[n]} and the sensing
covariance matrices {Zm[n]}—remain deeply coupled.
Specifically, the coupling manifests in the worst-case communication SINR constraint (1.1b),
which exhibits a Difference of Convex (DC) functions structure. By isolating the desired signal
power, the constraint is dominated by the non-convex term −|hH
m,kwm,k|2. Attempting a global
joint optimisation via global semi-definite relaxation (SDR) would require the elevation of all
communication vectors into covariance matrices. This approach not only precipitates an escala-
tion in computational complexity – thereby rendering standard interior-point methods incapable
of executing even a single iteration due to memory exhaustion – but also inevitably results in
the destruction of the rank-one property of the communication beams, necessitating suboptimal
Gaussian randomisation that contravenes the strict worst-case quality of service (QoS) guaran-
tees.
To rigorously bypass these mathematical dead ends, an Alternating Optimization (AO) ar-
chitecture rooted in Block Coordinate Descent (BCD) is proposed. Prior to entering the op-
timization loop, the MINLP is subjected to a dimensionality reduction: the binary variables
6\n\f\n{bmp[n]} are predetermined via a greedy max-channel-gain heuristic, completely decoupling the
integer constraints. Subsequently, the AO framework alternates between optimizing {wm,k[n]}
and {Zm[n]} in two sequential, convexified subproblems. This strategy guarantees monotonic
convergence of the total power consumption to a stationary point while natively preserving the
rank-one constraints of the communication beams.
2.2 Current Implementation and Identified Bottlenecks
2.2.1 Implementation of AO Solver
The proposed AO framework has been implemented in full using the CVX modelling system
with the SDPT3 solver. The algorithmic execution of the framework dictates an iterative loop
between two precisely constructed subproblems, continuing until the relative fractional change
in the total system power consumption falls below a predefined tolerance threshold. The com-
plete procedure is summarised in algorithm [alg:procedure]. 1.
Step A: Robust SOCP for Communication Beamforming In the first subproblem, the sens-
ing covariance matrices {Zm[n]} are temporarily treated as fixed parameters. Consequently,
the sensing-induced cross-interference hH
m,kZm[n]hm,k condenses into a constant noise-plus-
interference floor. To completely eradicate the non-convex DC structure, a phase rotation mech-
anism is introduced. By forcing the imaginary part of the desired signal to zero (Im(hH
m,kwm,k) =
0) and constraining the real part to be non-negative, the absolute value |hH
m,kwm,k| strictly
equates to its real component Re (hH
m,kwm,k).
Taking the square root of the SINR inequality and applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality
to bound the worst-case channel estimation error ∥∆hm,k∥ ≤ ϵk, the non-convex constraint is
elegantly reformulated into a strict Second-Order Cone Programming (SOCP) constraint. To
ensure algorithmic vitality during early iterations where fixed sensing interference might be
overwhelmingly high, a non-negative slack variable δc
k is introduced to soften the hard con-
straint, penalized heavily in the objective function to prevent arbitrary constraint violations.
Step B: SDP for Sensing Covariance with Anti-Blinding Penalty In the subsequent sub-
problem, the communication precoders {wm,k[n]} are fixed, transforming into a known covari-
ance matrix Wcov. The optimization of the sensing signals is then formulated as a standard
7\n\f\nAlgorithm 1 Alternating Optimization for ISAC Joint Resource Allocation
Require: Channels ˆhm,k, Gjmp; thresholds γk, γPoD
S , ΓTrack,p; tolerance ϵtol.
Ensure: Optimal {w⋆
m,k}, {Z ⋆
m}, and {b⋆
mp}.
1: Initialize: t ← 0; obtain {b⋆
mp} via max-channel-gain; feasible {Z (0)
m }.
2: repeat
3: t ← t + 1
4: {Step A: Robust SOCP for Communication Precoders }
5: given {Z (t−1)
m }, compute noise-plus-interference floor.
6: solve SOCP subproblem for {wm,k}:
7: minimize Total power + λc
∑δc
k
8: subject to Phase rotation Im(ˆhH
k wk) = 0 , ∀k
9: Worst-case QoS constraints with slack δc
k ≥ 0
10: update {w(t)
m,k} ← { w⋆
m,k}
11: {Step B: SDP for Sensing Covariance Matrices }
12: given {w(t)
m,k}, compute constant communication covariance.
13: solve SDP subproblem for {Zm}:
14: minimize Total power + λz
∑
k
ˆhH
k Zmˆhk {Null-steering penalty }
15: subject to Detection (γPoD
S ) and tracking ( ΓTrack) constraints
16: update {Z (t)
m } ← { Z ⋆
m}
17: {Convergence Check }
18: P (t) ← ∑
m,k ∥w(t)
m,k∥2 + ∑
m Tr(Z (t)
m )
19: until |P (t) − P (t−1)|/P (t−1) < ϵ tol
20: return {w(t)
m,k}, {Z (t)
m }
8\n\f\nSemi-Definite Programming (SDP) problem.
A pivotal engineering innovation implemented in this step is the ”anti-blinding” penalty
mechanism. Without intervention, a naive SDP solver would aggressively fulfill the target de-
tection (γPoD
S ) and tracking ( ΓTrack) thresholds by forming intense sensing beams, oblivious to
the spatial locations of the CUs. This would cause a tremendous amount of cross-interference,
causing the communication power to jump erratically in the subsequent Step A process. In order
to impose a cooperative behavior between users, a penalty term based on active null-steering,
defined by the total amount of power sensed by the communication users and injected into the
communication channels, is heavily weighted and injected into the objective function. This
mathematically forces the sensed signals to primarily align with the null space of the commu-
nication users, greatly improving the stability and convergence rate of the AO process.
Figure 2.1: Convergence profile of the AO solver.
2.2.2 Performance Bottlenecks Analysis
While the customized AO solver systematically resolves the mathematical intractability of the
joint formulation, extensive numerical experiments have exposed two critical bottlenecks that
mandate future structural optimization.
• Feasibility Crisis vs. Penalty Weighting: The convergence of the system under ex-
9\n\f\ntreme spatial channel correlation relies heavily on the introduced slack variables. When
the manual inputs for the tracking FIM threshold ( ΓTrack,p) and the communication QoS
threshold (γk) approach the theoretical limits of the physical degrees of freedom, the strict
feasibility region vanishes. In such situations, the success of the solver is artificially en-
sured by compromising the physical constraints in favor of slack penalties. This reveals
the vulnerability of a pure power minimization objective under overloaded demand, hint-
ing at a possible switch towards a Max-Min Fairness or Pareto optimization approach.
• Computational Complexity of the SDP Subproblem: Although substituting global
SDR with the AO framework reduces the optimization scale exponentially, Step B still
necessitates solving M independent positive semi-definite matrices of dimensionNt×Nt.
The computational complexity of the interior-point method employed for this SDP step
inherently scales at O(M 3N 6
t ). As the system evolves toward a true Cell-Free Massive
MIMO topology—characterized by massively distributed APs and large-scale antenna
arrays—this O(N 6
t ) scaling dictates an intolerable computational delay, rendering the
current solver fundamentally incompatible with the strict real-time scheduling constraints
of a dynamic coherence block.
10\n\f\nChapter 3
Conclusion and Future Work
3.1 Progress Summary
The problem addressed by this research is the basic problem of resource allocation for Cell-Free
Massive MIMO ISAC systems for sixth-generation wireless networks. Starting from the theo-
retical foundations provided by the previous research presented in Thesis A, where the problem
of joint resource allocation has been formulated as a Mixed Integer Non-Linear Programming
problem that reflects the intrinsic contradiction of the system in terms of QoS requirements for
communication and sensing as well as power efficiency, the current semester has been devoted
to the development of a viable solution based on the proposed mathematical framework.
The major accomplishment thus far is the design and initial implementation of an Alternat-
ing Optimization framework based on Block Coordinate Descent concepts. We realized that
global methods based on Semi-Definite Relaxation would lead to an unmanagably complex
formulation due to the need for lifting in the covariance matrices and destroying the rank-one
structure of the desired beams in the communication link. Instead, we developed a decompo-
sition strategy that splits the original problem into two tractable sub-problems. We developed
a phase rotation mechanism for the communication precoding sub-problem that eliminates the
non-convex structure of Difference of Convex functions in the absolute value terms due to the
worst-case SINR requirements in the presence of imperfect knowledge of the channel state in-
formation. We constrain the imaginary part of the desired signal to be zero and the real part to be
non-negative, resulting in an exact reformulation as a Second Order Cone Programming prob-
lem without any need for approximation or randomization. We also developed an innovative
solution strategy for the sensing covariance sub-problem that revealed an important instability
11\n\f\nmechanism in the original formulation. We realized that standard SDP solvers for this sub-
problem generate beams that are blind to the possible locations of the communication users
and lead to massive interference in the system. We developed an innovative ”Anti-Blinding”
penalty term that discourages power in the sensing beams from leaking into the communication
link.
The algorithmic pipeline has been partially implemented through the use of the CVX mod-
elling system along with an SDPT3 solver backend, which results in a codebase of approxi-
mately two hundred lines of MA TLAB code that implements the alternating loop between robust
SOCP-based communication precoding and penalized SDP-based sensing optimization. Nu-
merical experimentation has shown mixed results in small-scale scenarios that demonstrate both
the promise and current limitations of this proposed method. In some instances, the solver is able
to converge to a solution that meets the required resource allocation criteria, meets the required
communication quality of service thresholds, meets the required sensing detection thresholds,
and meets the required tracking accuracy thresholds; however, the overall convergence of this
alternating method is erratic and unpredictable, particularly due to an oscillatory behavior in
which successive iterations of the communication precoders and sensing covariance matrices
do not demonstrate a monotonic decrease in the overall objective function related to total power
consumption, resulting in an early termination of the overall method without a stationary point
being achieved. The Anti-Blinding penalty method, while theoretically sound, requires a man-
ual adjustment of a regularization factor that is currently not well understood, which can result
in an inability to sufficiently penalize the cross-interference terms or, on the other hand, overly
constrain the sensing degrees of freedom to the point of infeasibility. Furthermore, the phase
rotation mechanism utilized for the robust reformulation of the SOCP problem assumes that
accurate channel information is available, while numerical issues have been observed with re-
gard to the stability of the problem formulation, especially when the channel vectors approach
orthogonality with respect to the feasible subspace defined by the rotation constraints. Based
on these empirical results, it is evident that the current AO-based implementation is best char-
acterized as a proof-of-concept, while there is a need to refine considerably the underlying al-
gorithmic framework to ensure convergence, especially with regard to establishing theoretical
convergence results. First, with regard to the power minimization problem, there is considerable
sensitivity with regard to overloaded scenarios, where the required communication SINR lev-
els, together with tracking FIM thresholds, approach the theoretical degrees of freedom limits
12\n\f\nof the distributed antenna array, effectively leading to a zero feasible region, where slack vari-
ables have to be utilized to artificially relax the problem constraints. Second, with regard to the
interior-point method utilized to solve the SDP problem, there is a computational complexity of
O(M 3N 6
t ), which becomes computationally prohibitive, especially while addressing scenarios
where the system is evolving towards massive Cell-Free configurations, where multiple dis-
tributed APs, together with multiple antennas, have to operate within a real-time framework,
especially while addressing dynamic coherence blocks.
3.2 Revised Project Plan
With the nature of the academic calendar, ten weeks per semester, and the current status in the
fifth week of the current semester in Thesis B, the project schedule is adjusted to accommodate
the completion of all algorithmic development and evaluation in the remaining five weeks of
the current semester, with the entire current semester in Thesis C available for the writing of
the final thesis documents. The condensed schedule for the remainder of Thesis B calls for
aggressive prioritization in achieving functional simulation results that can be used as the basis
for the final thesis, accepting the fact that algorithmic perfection may not be achievable in the
current timeframe.
The main priority activity to be completed between Weeks 5 and 6 involves addressing the
underlying causes of convergence instability in the AO implementation. This can be achieved
through comprehensive logging of residual values and objective functions at each alternating
step to determine whether the source of instability is due to the SOCP subproblem through
numerical instabilities associated with phase rotation, due to the SDP subproblem through in-
sufficient penalty weights, or due to interactions between the two subproblems. A grid search
strategy can also be adopted to identify at least one configuration of the Anti-Blinding regu-
larization coefficient such that convergence stability can be ensured for a representative small-
scale scenario involving four APs serving two communication users while tracking two targets,
even if this involves a non-ideal configuration that does not generalize to other scenarios. Once
a minimally functional solver has been developed by Week 7, a Monte Carlo simulation can be
conducted between Weeks 7 and 8, but with a limited scope to ensure timely completion within
this period. This simulation can be conducted on moderate-scale scenarios involving at most
sixteen APs, each having at most four antennas, due to the computational challenges associated
13\n\f\nwith the cubic complexity of the SDP subproblem. We will seek to characterize these three
operating points in lightly loaded networks where the simultaneous satisfaction of the commu-
nication and sensing requirements is easily achievable, in moderately loaded networks where
the power minimization objective is operating close to the boundary of the feasible region, and
in overloaded networks where the AO solver is seen to fail to converge or converge after an
unacceptably large number of iterations. At the same time, acknowledging the fundamental
computational challenge in solving the SDP using the interior-point method, we will also seek
to develop an alternative machine learning-based approach in which a neural network is trained
to learn a direct mapping from channel state information to near-optimal sensing covariance
matrices. This is an exploratory direction that will involve the creation of a database of chan-
nel state information for which the AO solver is seen to converge to an optimal solution, the
design of an appropriate neural network architecture such as a graph neural network or a fully
connected neural network with residual connections, and verification that the neural network is
able to reproduce the same performance as the AO solver with millisecond-level latency. The
final two weeks of Thesis B will be focused on consolidating the simulation results, identifying
trends in the performance that are consistent across the random channel realizations, and doc-
umenting the failure cases and limitations that were seen during the experimentation process,
with the objective of delivering a comprehensive set of documentation that can be included in
the Thesis C documentation without the need for further computational simulation.
The period of ten weeks for the Thesis C is devoted to the development of the thesis doc-
umentation. For the first three weeks, the focus will be on the development of the technical
chapters of the thesis. These include the system model chapter that will cover the ISAC signal
formulation and the MINLP problem statement. Another chapter is the algorithm chapter that
will cover the AO framework. This will include the innovations such as the phase rotation and
the anti-blinding. The chapter will also include the limitations such as the instabilities and the
bottlenecks. The third chapter is the evaluation chapter. For the first three weeks, the focus
will be on the development of the technical chapters of the thesis. These include the system
model chapter that will cover the ISAC signal formulation and the MINLP problem statement.
Another chapter is the algorithm chapter that will cover the AO framework. This will include
the innovations such as the phase rotation and the anti-blinding. The chapter will also include
the limitations such as the instabilities and the bottlenecks. The third chapter is the evaluation
chapter.
14\n\f\nFigure 3.1: Revised project timetable.
3.3 Concluding Remarks
This research has created a theoretical base for resource allocation in Cell-Free Massive MIMO
ISAC systems, laying the groundwork for the creation of a computational framework to solve
the problem. During this current semester, a preliminary AO solver implementation, including
phase rotation for robust communication precoding and Anti-Blinding, was created for sens-
ing covariance optimization, while convergence instabilities were empirically determined to be
computation bottlenecks. The modified project plan presented here is a result of the condensed
time frame required by the academic calendar, with all algorithm creation and empirical test-
ing contained within the five weeks of Thesis B, leaving all of Thesis C available for thesis
documentation.
15